README, BIOME4, first beta release, 22 October 1999

Jed O. Kaplan
I. Colin Prentice
Max-Planck-Institute for Biogeochemistry
Postfach 10 01 64
D-07745 Jena
Germany

jed.kaplan@bgc-jena.mpg.de
cprentic@bgc-jena.mpg.de

INTRODUCTION

This document describes the distribution, installation, and execution of the 
first general release of the global biosphere model BIOME4, an interactive,
equilibrium coupled biogeography and biogeochemistry model.

DISTRIBUTION

This distribution of BIOME4 is provided completete with setup and driver
programs which allow immediate, stand-alone operation of the model.  The
distribution contains the complete model source code, driver software, and a
sample driver dataset containing a global, long-term average climatology and 
general soils dataset.  With these data, the BIOME4 model can simulate global
biogeography, the result a being potential natural vegetation, influenced by
climate, soils, and atmospheric CO2 concentration.

-----------------------

The distribution contains the following files:

README		this README file
COPYING		the software license file

biome4.f	the BIOME4 model source code.
biome4main.f	the shell which runs the setup and driver subroutines.
biome4setup.f	the setup subroutine for model initialization.
biome4driver.f	the driver subroutine for the BIOME4 model.

Makefile	a make file for building the model executable
biome4outvars	an ASCII text file with parameters for the output variables
biome4options	an ASCII text file for specifying run-time options

inputdata.nc	a netCDF file containing the long-term-mean driving data

-----------------------

The BIOME4 model may be customized to run with any type of driver software.  A 
description of the input values the model program requires are included in the 
source code.

If you would like to use the driver programs and data here you will also need to
have the 3.x version of the netCDF libraries installed.

from the netCDF website:

     NetCDF (network Common Data Form) is an interface for array-oriented 
     data access and a library that provides an implementation of the 
     interface. The netCDF library also defines a machine-independent 
     format for representing scientific data. Together, the interface, 
     library, and format support the creation, access, and sharing of 
     scientific data. The netCDF software was developed at the Unidata 
     Program Center in Boulder, Colorado. The freely available source can 
     be obtained as a compressed tar file or a zip file from Unidata or from 
     other mirror sites. 

http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/packages/netcdf/index.html

INSTALLATION

1. Be sure you have installed the version 3.x netCDF libraries.

2. Decompress and un-tar the BIOME4 distribution.  To do this you will need to
   have the GNU gzip software (free) or the bzip2 software (better compression, 
   also free at http://sourceware.cygnus.com/bzip2/index.html).

3. Ensure that all of the files in the distribution reside in the same directory
   (exception, the inputdata.nc file may reside in an arbitrary directory).

4. Edit the makefile.
   You will likely need to change the path names to your netCDF libraries and
   include files, and the command for your FORTRAN77 compiler.

5. Type make.

6. The executable program, called 'biome4', is ready for use.

EXECUTION

To run the BIOME4 model with the provided driver programs and data, the user
must configure a runtime options file.  A sample runtime options file is
provided in the distribution (biome4options).  The file contains information
about the source and destination directories of the input and output files that
BIOME4 will use.  It also contains flags which set the global concentration of
atmospheric CO2 used by the model.  The operator may also select here the
variables to be output, and a geographic window in which to run the model.

The runtime options file is in ASCII text and commented where appropriate.  File
path names must be enclosed in single quotes ' '.

The runtime options file must be called 'biome4options' and reside in the same
directory as the model execuatble program 'biome4'.

Once the options file is configured to the wishes of the operator, simply enter:

biome4

at the command prompt.  A dot and percentage ticker will keep track of the 
progress of the model.

All model output will be directed to the file 'biome4output.nc' in the path
specified on the second line of the options file.

NOTE:  The model will overwrite an existing output file without questioning the
operator - change the name or move your output file if you wish to save
successive runs.

A variety of tools are available for viewing, extracting and dumping data from
netCDF output files.  I personally recommend the tools 'ncview' and 'GMT' for 
data visualization and mapping.  See the Unidata home page for more information.

PROBLEMS, QUESTIONS, AND COMMENT

As this is a beta version of the model, there may be certain configurations of
hardware, operating systems, and compilers that result in compiler errors,
erratic output, or incomprehensible results.  Please note that this software is
distributed without warranty under the terms of the GNU public license.

However, we consider the version 'frozen' and the biogeography (biomes) output 
produced by the model to be definitive.  All other output should be considered 
equivocal.

We would very much appreciate comments, questions and suggestions for future
versions of the model.

CAVEAT

This model represents unpublished scientific effort.  While the authors are
making the best effort to present the results of BIOME4 in a internationally
refereed publication, this may yet take some time.  In the interest of currency
we are freely distributing the model source code now and under the GNU general 
public license.  Please read the license, in the file 'COPYING' and respect the
intellectual property rights of the authors.  If you would like to publish
results generated by BIOME4, please contact one of the authors listed below
first.

Jena, 22 October 1999
Jed O. Kaplan
I. Colin Prentice

jkaplan@bgc-jena.mpg.de
cprentic@bgc-jena.mpg.de
